---
layout: post
title: "[HTML5] Lesson 1: Hello World!"
description: "Introduction to HTML"
tags: [self-taught, HTML, Code]
categories: [self-taught, HTML, Code]
image:
  background: Pattern/school.png
---
<style>
hr{
	border: 0;
    height: 1px;
    background-image: linear-gradient(to right, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.75), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0));
}
</style>

## Introduction
What is **HTML**? HTML is also known as a **H**yper **T**ext **M**arkup **L**anguage.  HTML describes the structure of web pages using <cite>markup</cite>.  The <cite>markup</cite> language is a system for annotating a document in a way that is syntactically distiguishable from the text.  HTML elements are the building blocks of HTML pages.  These elements are represented by tags which label pieces of content such as "heading", "paragraph", "table", and so on. The tags or categories are classified by putting <> around the element type.

* &lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt; declaration defines this document to be HTML5
* &lt;html&gt; element is the root element of an HTML page
* &lt;head&gt; element contains meta information about the document
* &lt;title&gt; element specifies a title for the document
* &lt;body&gt; element contains the visible page content
* &lt;h1&gt; element defines a large heading
* &lt;p&gt; element defines a paragraph

#### HTML Tags
HTML tags are elements names surrounded by angle brackets:<br/>
&lt;tagname&gt;content goes here...&lt;/tagname&gt; <br/>
HTML tags normally come in **pairs** like &lt;p&gt;&lt;/p&gt;.  The first tag in a pair is the **start tag** and the second tag is the **end tag**.  The end tag is written like the start tag, but with a **forward slash** inserted before the tag name.

#### HTML Page Structure
Below is the basic structure of a HTML page structure:
{% highlight html %}
{% raw %}
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Page Title</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h1>This is a heading</h1>
		<p>This is a paragraph</p>
		<p>This is another paragraph</p>
	</body>
</html>
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

<hr/>

## Basics
All HTML documents must start with a document type declarartion: &lt;!DOCTYPE html&gt;.  The HTML document itself begins with &lt;html&gt; and ends with &lt;/html&gt;.  The visible part of the HTML document is between &lt;body&gt; and &lt;/body&gt;.

#### Headings
HTML headings are defined with the &lt;h1&gt; to &lt;h6&gt; tags.  &lt;h1&gt; defines the most important heading and gets less important until the lesst important heading, &lt;h6&gt;.

* <h1>This is heading 1</h1>
* <h2>This is heading 2</h2>
* <h3>This is heading 3</h3>
* <h4>This is heading 4</h4>
* <h5>This is heading 5</h5>
* <h6>This is heading 6</h6>

<hr/>

## Paragraphs, Links, and Images
Just like heading tags, paragraph, links, and images also have their own corresponding tags. <br/>
HTML paragraphs are defined with a &lt;p&gt;&lt;/p&gt; tag.  The paragraph tag will automatically indent the content once the tag is closed. <br/>
&lt;p&gt;This is a paragraph&lt;/p&gt; <br/>
HTML links are defined with the &lt;a&gt;&lt;/a&gt; tag however, more information is needed to completely label the HTML element.  The link's destination is specified in the **href attribute**.  Attributes are used to provide additional information about HTML elements. <br/>
&lt;a href="http://www.google.com"&gt;This sends to the Google homepage&lt;/a&gt; <br/>
HTML images are defined with the &lt;img&gt; tag and the corresponding attributes are source file (src), alternative text (alt), width, and height. <br/>
&lt;img src="filename.jpg" alt="displayname" width="104" height="142"&gt;

<hr/>

