---
layout: post
title: "Kinematic and Dynamic Analysis of Mechanisms"
description: "ME 130- Kinematic and Dynamic Analysis of Mechanisms"
modified: 2016-10-07
tags: [Mechanical Engineering, project]
categories: [Mechanical Engineering]
image:
  background: grey_wash_wall.png
  feature: /ME130/mech_cover.jpg
---
<style>
hr{
	border: 0;
    height: 1px;
    background-image: linear-gradient(to right, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.75), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0));
}
</style>

## Crank Slider(Single Cylinder Engine)
"A slider-crank linkage is a four-bar linkage with three revolute joints and one prismatic, or sliding, joint. The rotation of the crank drives the linear movement of the slider, or the expansion of gases against a sliding piston in a cylinder can drive the rotation of the crank. <br/>
There are two types of slider-cranks: in-line and offset.
1. In-line: An in-line slider-crank has its slider positioned so the line of travel of the hinged joint of the slider passes through the base joint of the crank.  This creates a symmetric slider movement back and forth as the crank rotates.
2. Offset: If the line of travel of the hinged joint of the slider does not pass through the base pivot of the crank, the slider movement is not symmetric.  It moves faster in one direction than the other.  This is called a <cite>quick-return mechanism</cite>. <br/>
An in-line crank slider is orientated in a way in which the pivot point of the crank is coincident with the axis of the linear movement. The follower arm, which is the link that connects the crank arm to the slider, connects to a pin in the center of sliding object. This pin is considererd to be on the linear movement axis.  Therefore, to be considered an <cite>in-line</cite> crank slider, the pivot point of the crank arm mus be <cite>in-line</cite> with this pin point." <br/>
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-bar_linkage#Slider-crank_linkage] <br/>
Consider the slider crank mechanism as a 2 bar linkage mechanism.  The crank with a length, r,  and the slider with a length, l.

>> angles = input('[Position, Velocity, Acceleration]= '); <br/>
r1 = input('Crank Length= '); <br/>
r2 = input('Slider Length= '); <br/>
slider = input('Slider Dimensions [height width]= ') <br/>
theta = angles(1); <br/>
while theta <= 360 <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;alpha = asind(r1 • sind(theta)/r2); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;x0 = 0; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;y0 = 0; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;x1 = r1 • cosd(theta); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;y1 = r1 • sind(theta); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;x2 = x1 + r2 • cosd(alpha); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;y2 = 0; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sx1 = x2 - slider(2)/2; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sx2 = x2 + slider(2)/2; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sy1 = y2 + slider(1)/2; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sy2 = y2 - slider(1)/2; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;axis ([-r1 - 1&nbsp;&nbsp;r1 + r2 + slider(2)/2 + 1&nbsp;&nbsp;-r1 - 1&nbsp;&nbsp;r1 + r2 + 1]); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;axis square; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;hold on; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plot([x0&nbsp;&nbsp;x1&nbsp;&nbsp;x2],[y0&nbsp;&nbsp;y1&nbsp;&nbsp;y2],'k','LineWidth',2); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plot([sx1&nbsp;&nbsp;sx2&nbsp;&nbsp;sx2&nbsp;&nbsp;sx1&nbsp;&nbsp;sx1],[ <br/>sy1&nbsp;&nbsp;sy1&nbsp;&nbsp;sy2&nbsp;&nbsp;sy2&nbsp;&nbsp;sy1],'g','LineWidth',2) <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P0_Circle = viscircles([0&nbsp;&nbsp;0],r1,'LineStyle','--'); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P1_Circle = viscircles([x0&nbsp;&nbsp;y0],0.1); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P2_Circle = viscircles([x1&nbsp;&nbsp;y1],0.1); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;P3_Circle = viscircles([x2&nbsp;&nbsp;y2],0.1); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pause(0.001); <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;clf; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;theta = theta+angles(2) • (180/pi)/60; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;if theta > 360 <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;theta = 0; <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;end <br/>
end