---
layout: post
title: "Stanford Center on Longevity: Design Challenge (Senior Design)"
description: "ME 175- Senior Design Project"
modified: 2016-10-07
tags: [Mechanical Engineering, project]
categories: [Mechanical Engineering]
image:
  background: grey_wash_wall.png
  feature: /ME175/Senior_Design_Cover.png
---
<style>
hr{
	border: 0;
    height: 1px;
    background-image: linear-gradient(to right, rgba(0, 0, 0, 0), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.75), rgba(0, 0, 0, 0));
}
</style>

## Stanford Center on Longevity: Design Challenge (Senior Design)

### Challenge Goals:
* Create well-designed, practical solutions that address key issues associated with aging
* Encourage a new generation of students to become knowledgeable about aging issues
* Provide promising designers with a path to drive change in the world

### Challenge Overview

##### Background
Designers and technologists are waking up to aging societies as a major trend of our century, but they most often view aging as what happens to someone else. In our rush to fix problems, we are ignoring possibilities that could lead to greater happiness for individuals in later life. We need to understand the goals and dreams of older individuals from their perspective and create solutions that help them live the best life possible.

##### Design Track Categories
The challenge will consist of three tracks: Mind, Mobility, and Financial Security, reflecting the Center’s belief that people thrive best when they are mentally sharp, physically fit, and financially secure throughout their entire lives. Each of these tracks will have its own expert judges, award up to $17,000 in total cash prizes, and offer sponsored travel to Stanford, where finalists will present their designs to prominent industry, academic, and government leaders.

### Challenge Track Descriptions

##### Mind Challenge: "Delight the Mind"
The 2015-2016 Challenge focuses on solutions that improve psychological functioning by encouraging lifestyles and practices that people want to do. Exercising your brain through activities that delight, for example, or encouraging easy-to-adopt lifestyles and fun practices that:

* Improve cognitive performance
* Enhance emotional wellbeing
* Foster civic engagement

##### Mobility Challenge: "Discover the Motion"
Remaining active physically creates a multitude of benefits: reduction in chronic disease, protection against heart disease and depression, and enabling independence. It is increasingly apparent that even relatively moderate amounts of activity provide significant benefits. The goal of this challenge is to build activity into life by making activities fun. <br/>

Examples of the kinds of solutions we envision include:

* Encourage movement through intergenerational activities
* Encourage physical activities by doing for others
* Create devices that encourage "micro-activities" during normal daily life
* Build fun games that encourage movement
* Use sustainability goals to motivate activity

##### Financial Security Challene: "Foster Financial Fitness"
Happiness comes in large part from financial security — but it’s often difficult for the young and even middle aged to start and stick with lifetime fiscal plans. This challenge looks for ways to make this planning easier, less stressful, and more successful. <br/>

Solutions to this challenge could include:

* Invent ways to get younger people to create a lifetime financial plan
* Gamification
* Models that create milestones at different life points
* Find ways to create continual awareness of how financially fit you are -is there a "Financial Fitbit"?
* Build tools for envisioning financial outcomes based on current decisions
* Find ways to encourage intergenerational conversations about money

<hr/>
<!--///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////-->

**Group Members**: David&nbsp;Chon, Ben&nbsp;Morag, Jesusxavier&nbsp;Diaz <br/>

## Problem Statement

The first plan of action was to do some background research on the **Problem Statement**. <br/>

Stanford Center on Longevity, 2016 Design Challenge: <br/>
"**Using Happiness to Optimize Longevity**" <br/>
"...we are ignoring possibilities that could lead to greater happines for individuals in <u>later life</u>. We need to understand the goals and dreams of <u>older individuals</u> from their perspective and create solutions that help them live the best life possible." <sup>**[1]**</sup>

## Background
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As people age numerous physical problems surface. The main reason the elderly get hurt is due to falling. There are many reasons why the elderly fall in the first place; including dizziness, insufficient muscle strength, coordination, and even slow reflexes. However, the main cause of falling amongst the elderly is knee problems. After surveying a few elderly people at a local senior community, most of them claimed to have pain in their knees due to old age and knee injuries.  Most injuries can affect any of the ligaments, bursa, or tendons surrounding the knee joint.  Diseases or conditions that involve the knee joint can cause pain within the knee.  Many of the symptoms of knee pain can be a result of excess fluid forming in the joint. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The knee joint is a modified hinge joint and has six degrees of freedom.  The movements of the knee joint are described in different motions: flexion, extension, medial rotation and lateral rotation.  Flexion is the motion to bend the knee and extension is exactly the opposite, the extension of the knee.  There are two groups of muscles located at the knee.  The front of the thigh contains four quadriceps muscles to straighten the knee from a bent position and the hamstring muscles, along the back of the thigh from the hip to just below the knee, help to bend the knee. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first step in helping the elderly with their knee problems is to locate where the pain and injury occurs.  In order for doctors to find what’s wrong, the patient must undergo a physical examination.  In this process, the doctor bends, straightens, rotates, or presses on the knee to feel for injuries and to determine the extent of pain the patient can withstand.  Most diagnostic tests consist of X-rays, CT scans, radionuclide scans (bone scans), MRI, and even autopsy.  However, the most common knee injury known is arthritis. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arthritis is very common but is not well understood. Actually, arthritis is not a single disease; it is an informal way of referring to joint pain or joint disease. There are more than 100 different types of arthritis and related conditions. People of all ages, sexes and races can and do have arthritis, and it is the leading cause of disability in the United States. More than 50 million adults and 300,000 children have some type of arthritis <sup>[2]</sup>. It is most common among women and occurs more frequently as people get older. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Sometimes called degenerative joint disease or degenerative arthritis, osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common chronic condition of the joints, affecting approximately 27 million Americans <sup>[3]</sup>. OA can affect any joint, but it occurs most often in knees, hips, lower back and neck, small joints of the fingers and the bases of the thumb and big toe. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Although OA occurs in people of all ages, osteoarthritis is most common in people older than the age of 65. Common risk factors include increasing age, obesity, previous joint injury, overuse of the joint, weak thigh muscles, and genes. One in two adults will develop symptoms of knee OA during their lives, one in four adults will develop symptoms of hip OA by age 85, and one in 12 people of 60 years or older have hand OA <sup>[2]</sup>. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Osteoarthritis is a chronic, long term disease. There is no cure, but treatments are available to manage symptoms. Long term management of the disease will include several factors: managing symptoms, such as pain, stiffness and swelling; improving joint mobility and flexibility; maintaining a healthy weight; and getting enough of exercise.
According to the Harvard University School of Public Health, getting regular physical activity is one of the greatest things one can do for their health <sup>[4]</sup>. It has been shown that regular physical activity can help reduce the risk of falling, heart disease, stroke, osteoporosis, diabetes, and certain types of cancers among other things <sup>[4]</sup>. As people age, the capabilities to stay active are challenged. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is important to maintain an active lifestyle as there are many benefits of having a healthy body. One of the most devastating attacks in this lifestyle is when the body cannot support itself. The most common sports injuries are knee ligament tears <sup>[5]</sup>. If the knee sustains a torn ligament, one must have an operation to repair it if they are to walk on that knee ever again. The crucial tissue in the knees that help it operate properly, are subject to substantial force. They can be torn from an individual collision, or even just the fatigue of a lifetime of everyday use. Furthermore, the elderly are more prone to have osteoporosis, which can result in bone fractures. While these problem are not exclusive to the elderly, they are more ubiquitously pronounced by them. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The device should enable the elderly to live their lives independently and actively, regardless of how many unhealthy knees they possess. We want the elderly community to be living long and healthy lives to pass on their own history into ours. If the device helps achieve this goal, then we have succeeded with the goal. In order to do this the device has to meet the demands, and tastes of the target demographic. Furthermore, it has to be widely customizable as the elderly community encompass a large group of people with varying needs and difficulties.   

### Problem Definition

* Product Development begins by determining what the needs are that a product must meet.
* Understanding any problem thoroughly is crucial to reaching an outstanding solution.
* The <cite>problem definition process</cite> is also called the need indentification step.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The purpose of the device is to help individuals with knee injuries, especially the elderly, stay active and independent to live healthier lives.  This product will vastly open the range of activities that the elderly can enjoy without the help of others.  One of the objectives for the device is to enable the elderly to interact with their grandchildren through physical activities.  The other objective is to allow the elderly to independently enjoy the activities of their youth, such as: dancing, hiking, gardening, biking, etc.  It will also be largely customizable to help meet the various needs and demands of the target audience which are not only the elderly, but also other people with knee injuries or problems. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The target audience, in a broader view, is anyone with a knee injury; which is a large market.  However, the focus will be towards the elderly as they face the most adversity to stay active.  Today, there are many competing entities focused on knee injuries.  One could go into any supermarket or drugstore and find three different types of knee braces.  The cheap ones are not effective enough, and the more expensive ones are often too heavy and clunky, which get in the way of everyday activity.  Also, as medicine advances the cost of operating on a torn knee ligament should drop and the quality of the replacements will improve. Currently, we are looking at activities, such as dancing and riding a bicycle, that the device would support and eventually lead to the activities without the device.  There is currently no device that addresses these needs and supports any form of enjoyment of dancing.  There is, however, already a device that can be attached to a bicycle crank that limits the range of motion of the biker called Ortho-Pedals.  This device is similar to an idea we had before and does a good job of enabling those with weak knees to stay active.  It is however rather expensive for a price of $149.99, and does nothing to encourage social activity across generations.  This is the goal of both the Stanford Longevity Design Challenge and the project. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We aim to create a device which alleviates or reduces the force and burden on the user's knee.  It should be aesthetically pleasing and comfortable to use.  Creating an affordable and sustainable production is important to the goal of the project.  The production of the device should not negatively affect the ecosystem, and we want to keep production costs as low as possible in order to sell the device at a reasonable price.  The life-cycle of the device should be long enough to justify the price, ideally at least 10 years of regular use.  The materials should all be recyclable at the end of their life-cycle. Although we are limited to recyclable materials, the device has to be able to support the wearer through the stress and burden of physical activities such as riding a bicycle or dancing. The device would be small, user friendly, and light enough for the user to independently exercise.  This device is meant as a stepping stone into a normal lifestyle.  Eventually, users should be able to live their normal lives without the worries and pain from their knees, thus never having to use the device in the future until required.

### Design Partition

* Function - describes what the product must do
	* Independent of particular solutions
	* What is to be done not how it is to be done
* Steps for Functional Decomposition
	* Find overall function to be accomplished
	* Decompose into sub-functions
	* Refine the overall function statement
* Purpose for Functional Decomposition
	* Helps to determine all the functions needed
	* Leads to better understanding of the problem
	* Controls search for solutions
	* Guides brainstorming and other concept generation activities

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The objective of the project is to design a device that aids both elderly and injured people, in everyday activities. To do so, the device will focus on the knees, since they are involved in most mobility activities and they are the most likely to be affected by injuries or aging diseases such as arthritis and osteoporosis. In order to design the device there are five major areas the design should cover: range of motion, support, durability, difficulty of use, and adjustability. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Range of Motion</u>: It is important to notice that the knee is a joint and its function is to bend, therefore its functionality is highly dependant on its range of motion. The range of motion of a regular knee is nearly 180 degrees, yet one of the problems of knee injuries and diseases is that they limit this range of motion and can sometimes cause stiffness and inflexibility. The design should take this into account by having an adjustable range of motion so it can adapt to every individual's needs. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Support</u>: The biggest problem with elderly people related to knees is falling. This happens due to the lack of support from their knees. As people grow older their bones and muscles grow weaker, therefore in order to counteract this diminishing strength the device should provide the user with enough support to achieve everyday activities, like walking, with no fear of falling or their knees giving up on them. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Durability</u>: Since the device is designed to be used on everyday activities, it is safe to assume it will be used daily. Like every other product meant for daily use, durability is a major concern. The device should be able to withstand different weather conditions, day to day wear and tear, falls, and even extreme uses like athletic activities. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Difficulty of use</u>: Since the target audience includes everyone, it is necessary to acknowledge that the difficulty of use of the device should be within the understanding of a normal person with no background knowledge. Even though doctors or physical therapists may assist some users, the device should be easy to use in order for anyone to use it on their own. <br/>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<u>Adjustability</u>: Even though arthritis is more common in overweight people, joint pain and knee injuries can happen to anyone. In order for the device to appeal to the general audience, the design should be adjustable to any size, some of the factors that need to be taken into account is the weight of the person, the height, and the overall leg dimensions.


[1] "Stanford Center On Longevity Design Challenge", <cite>Stanford Center on Longevity Design Challenge 2015-2016</cite>. n.p., n.d. Web 5 Oct. 2015. <br/>
< <http://longevity3.stanford.edu/designchallenge2015-16/> > <br/>
[2] "What is Arthritis?", <cite>Arthritis Foundation</cite>. n.p., n.d. Web 27 Oct. 2015 <br/>
< <http://www.arthritis.org/about-arthritis/understanding-arthritis/what-is-arthritis.php> > <br/>
[3] "Osteoarthritis", <cite>National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Sin Diseases</cite>. n.p., n.d. Web 27 Oct. 2015 <br/>
< <http://www.naims.nih.gov/Health_Info/Osteoarthritis/default.asp> > <br/>
[4] "Harvard University School of Public Health - Staying Active", <cite>The Nutrition Source</cite>. n.p., n.d. Web 27 Oct. 2015 <br/>
< <http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/staying-active/> > <br/>
[5] "Midwest Orthopedics at RUSH", <cite>Sports Medicine - Knee Injuries</cite>. n.p., n.d. Web 27 Oct. 2015 <br/>
< <http://www.rushortho.com/sm_knee_injuries.cfm> >
